[
2
]
There were of course people doing what we would now call "original
work," and they were often admired for it, but they weren't seen
as models. Archimedes knew that he was the first to prove that a
sphere has 2/3 the volume of the smallest enclosing cylinder and
was very pleased about it. But you don't find ancient writers urging
their readers to emulate him. They regarded him more as a prodigy
than a model.
Now many more of us can follow Archimedes's example and devote most
of our attention to one kind of work. He turned out to be a model
after all, along with a collection of other people that his
contemporaries would have found it strange to treat as a distinct
group, because the vein of people making new things ran at right
angles to the social hierarchy.
What kinds of new things count? I'd rather leave that question to
the makers of them. It would be a risky business to try to define
any kind of threshold, because new kinds of work are often despised
at first. Raymond Chandler was writing literal pulp fiction, and
he's now recognized as one of the best writers of the twentieth
century. Indeed this pattern is so common that you can use it as a
recipe: if you're excited about some kind of work that's not
considered prestigious and you can explain what everyone else is
overlooking about it, then this is not merely a kind of work that's
ok to do, but one to seek out.
The other reason I wouldn't want to define any thresholds is that
we don't need them. The kind of people who make good new things 
don't need rules to keep them honest.
So there's my guess at a set of principles to live by: take care
of people and the world, and make good new things. Different people
will do these to varying degrees. There will presumably be lots who
focus entirely on taking care of people. There will be a few who
focus mostly on making new things. But even if you're one of those,
you should at least make sure that the new things you make don't
net 
harm
 people or the world. And if you go a step further and
try to make things that help them, you may find you're ahead on the
trade. You'll be more constrained in what you can make, but you'll
make it with more energy.
On the other hand, if you make something amazing, you'll often be
helping people or the world even if you didn't mean to. Newton was
driven by curiosity and ambition, not by any practical effect his
work might have, and yet the practical effect of his work has been
enormous. And this seems the rule rather than the exception. So
if you think you can make something amazing, you should probably
just go ahead and do it.
Notes
[
1
]
We could treat all three as the same kind of should by saying
that it's one's duty to live well — for example by saying, as some
Christians have, that it's one's duty to make the most of one's
God-given gifts. But this seems one of those casuistries people
invented to evade the stern requirements of religion: you could
spend time studying math instead of praying or performing acts of
charity because otherwise you were rejecting a gift God had given
you. A useful casuistry no doubt, but we don't need it.
We could also combine the first two principles, since people are
part of the world. Why should our species get special treatment?
I won't try to justify this choice, but I'm skeptical that anyone
who claims to think differently actually lives according to their
principles.
[
2
]
Confucius was also excluded from public life after ending up
on the losing end of a power struggle, and presumably he too would
not be so famous now if it hadn't been for this long stretch of
enforced leisure.
Thanks
 to Trevor Blackwell, Jessica 
Livingston, and Robert Morris for reading drafts of this.