March 2025
What should one do? That may seem a strange question, but it's not
meaningless or unanswerable. It's the sort of question kids ask
before they learn not to ask big questions. I only came across it
myself in the process of investigating something else. But once I
did, I thought I should at least try to answer it.
So what 
should
 one do? One should help people, and take care of
the world. Those two are obvious. But is there anything else? When
I ask that, the answer that pops up is 
Make good new things
.
I can't prove that one should do this, any more than I can prove
that one should help people or take care of the world. We're talking
about first principles here. But I can explain why this principle
makes sense. The most impressive thing humans can do is to think.
It may be the most impressive thing that can be done. And the best
kind of thinking, or more precisely the best proof that one has
thought well, is to make good new things.
I mean new things in a very general sense. Newton's physics was a
good new thing. Indeed, the first version of this principle was to
have good new ideas. But that didn't seem general enough: it didn't
include making art or music, for example, except insofar as they
embody new ideas. And while they may embody new ideas, that's not
all they embody, unless you stretch the word "idea" so uselessly
thin that it includes everything that goes through your nervous
system.
Even for ideas that one has consciously, though, I prefer the
phrasing "make good new things." There are other ways to describe
the best kind of thinking. To make discoveries, for example, or to
understand something more deeply than others have. But how well do
you understand something if you can't make a model of it, or write
about it? Indeed, trying to express what you understand is not just
a way to prove that you understand it, but a way to understand it
better.
Another reason I like this phrasing is that it biases us toward
creation. It causes us to prefer the kind of ideas that are naturally
seen as making things rather than, say, making critical observations
about things other people have made. Those are ideas too, and
sometimes valuable ones, but it's easy to trick oneself into believing
they're more valuable than they are. Criticism seems sophisticated,
and making new things often seems awkward, especially at first; and
yet it's precisely those first steps that are most rare and valuable.
Is newness essential? I think so. Obviously it's essential in
science. If you copied a paper of someone else's and published it
as your own, it would seem not merely unimpressive but dishonest.
And it's similar in the arts. A copy of a good painting can be a
pleasing thing, but it's not impressive in the way the original
was. Which in turn implies it's not impressive to make the same
thing over and over, however well; you're just copying yourself.
Note though that we're talking about a different kind of should
with this principle. Taking care of people and the world are shoulds
in the sense that they're one's duty, but making good new things
is a should in the sense that this is how to live to one's full
potential. Historically most rules about how to live have been a
mix of both kinds of should, though usually with more of the former
than the latter.