September 2024
There's some debate about whether it's a good idea to "follow your
passion." In fact the question is impossible to answer with a simple
yes or no. Sometimes you should and sometimes you shouldn't, but
the border between should and shouldn't is very complicated. The
only way to give a general answer is to trace it.
When people talk about this question, there's always an implicit
"instead of." All other things being equal, why wouldn't you work
on what interests you the most? So even raising the question implies
that all other things aren't equal, and that you have to choose
between working on what interests you the most and something else,
like what pays the best.
And indeed if your main goal is to make money, you can't usually
afford to work on what interests you the most. People pay you for
doing what they want, not what you want. But there's an obvious
exception: when you both want the same thing. For example, if you
love football, and you're good enough at it, you can get paid a lot
to play it.
Of course the odds are against you in a case like football, because
so many other people like playing it too. This is not to say you
shouldn't try though. It depends how much ability you have and how
hard you're willing to work.
The odds are better when you have strange tastes: when you like
something that pays well and that few other people like. For example,
it's clear that Bill Gates truly loved running a software company.
He didn't just love programming, which a lot of people do. He loved
writing software for customers. That is a very strange taste indeed,
but if you have it, you can make a lot by indulging it.
There are even some people who have a genuine intellectual interest
in making money. This is distinct from mere greed. They just can't
help noticing when something is mispriced, and can't help doing
something about it. It's like a puzzle for them.

[
1
]
In fact there's an edge case here so spectacular that it turns all
the preceding advice on its head. If you want to make a really

huge