[
16
]
One shouldn't feel bad about not wanting to watch woke
movies any more than one would feel bad about not wanting to
listen to Christian rock. In my twenties I drove across
America several times, listening to local radio stations.
Occasionally I'd turn the dial and hear some new song. But
the moment anyone mentioned Jesus I'd turn the dial again.
Even the tiniest bit of being preached to was enough to make
me lose interest.
But by the same token we should not automatically reject
everything the woke believe. I'm not a Christian, but I can
see that many Christian principles are good ones. It would
be a mistake to discard them all just because one didn't
share the religion that espoused them. It would be the sort
of thing a religious zealot would do.
If we have genuine pluralism, I think we'll be safe from
future outbreaks of woke intolerance. Wokeness itself won't
go away. There will for the foreseeable future continue to
be pockets of woke zealots inventing new moral fashions. The
key is not to let them treat their fashions as normative.
They can change what their coreligionists are allowed to say
every few months if they like, but they mustn't be allowed
to change what we're allowed to say.

[
17
]
The more general problem — how to prevent similar outbreaks
of aggressively performative moralism — is of course
harder. Here we're up against human nature. There will
always be prigs. And in particular there will always be the
enforcers among them, the

aggressively conventional-minded
.
These people are born that way. Every society has them. So
the best we can do is to keep them bottled up.
The aggressively conventional-minded aren't always on the
rampage. Usually they just enforce whatever random rules are
nearest to hand. They only become dangerous when some new
ideology gets a lot of them pointed in the same direction at
once. That's what happened during the Cultural Revolution,
and to a lesser extent (thank God) in the two waves of
political correctness we've experienced.
We can't get rid of the aggressively conventional-minded.

[
18
]

And we couldn't prevent people from creating new
ideologies that appealed to them even if we wanted to. So if
we want to keep them bottled up, we have to do it one step
downstream. Fortunately when the aggressively
conventional-minded go on the rampage they always do one
thing that gives them away: they define new 
heresies
 to
punish people for. So the best way to protect ourselves from
future outbreaks of things like wokeness is to have powerful
antibodies against the concept of heresy.
We should have a conscious bias against defining new forms
of heresy. Whenever anyone tries to ban saying something
that we'd previously been able to say, our initial
assumption should be that they're wrong. Only our initial
assumption of course. If they can prove we should stop
saying it, then we should. But the burden of proof is on
them. In liberal democracies, people trying to prevent
something from being said will usually claim they're not
merely engaging in censorship, but trying to prevent some
form of "harm". And maybe they're right. But once again, the
burden of proof is on them. It's not enough to claim harm;
they have to prove it.
As long as the aggressively conventional-minded continue to
give themselves away by banning heresies, we'll always be
able to notice when they become aligned behind some new
ideology. And if we always fight back at that point, with
any luck we can stop them in their tracks.
The number of true things we 
can't say

should not increase. If it does, something is wrong.
Notes
[
1
]
Why did 1960s radicals focus on the causes they did?
One of the people who reviewed drafts of this essay
explained this so well that I asked if I could quote him: