[
5
]
Was it sexist to propose that Darwin's greater male
variability hypothesis might explain some variation in human
performance? Sexist enough to get Larry Summers pushed out
as president of Harvard, apparently. One woman who heard the
talk in which he mentioned this idea said it made her feel
"physically ill" and that she had to leave halfway through.
If the test of a hostile environment is how it makes people
feel, this certainly sounds like one. And yet it does seem
plausible that greater male variability explains some of the
variation in human performance. So which should prevail,
comfort or truth? Surely if truth should prevail anywhere,
it should be in universities; that's supposed to be their
specialty; but for decades starting in the late 1980s the
politically correct tried to pretend this conflict didn't
exist.

[
6
]
Political correctness seemed to burn out in the second half
of the 1990s. One reason, perhaps the main reason, was that
it literally became a joke. It offered rich material for
comedians, who performed their usual disinfectant action
upon it. Humor is one of the most powerful weapons against
priggishness of any sort, because prigs, being humorless,
can't respond in kind. Humor was what defeated Victorian
prudishness, and by 2000 it seemed to have done the same
thing to political correctness.
Unfortunately this was an illusion. Within universities the
embers of political correctness were still glowing brightly.
After all, the forces that created it were still there. The
professors who started it were now becoming deans and
department heads. And in addition to their departments there
were now a bunch of new ones explicitly focused on social
justice. Students were still hungry for things to be morally
pure about. And there had been an explosion in the number of
university administrators, many of whose jobs involved
enforcing various forms of political correctness.
In the early 2010s the embers of political correctness burst
into flame anew. There were several differences between this
new phase and the original one. It was more virulent. It
spread further into the real world, although it still burned
hottest within universities. And it was concerned with a
wider variety of sins. In the first phase of political
correctness there were really only three things people got
accused of: sexism, racism, and homophobia (which at the
time was a neologism invented for the purpose). But between
then and 2010 a lot of people had spent a lot of time trying
to invent new kinds of -isms and -phobias and seeing which
could be made to stick.
The second phase was, in multiple senses, political
correctness metastasized. Why did it happen when it did? My
guess is that it was due to the rise of social media,
particularly Tumblr and Twitter, because one of the most
distinctive features of the second wave of political
correctness was the 
cancel mob
: a mob of angry people
uniting on social media to get someone ostracized or fired.
Indeed this second wave of political correctness was
originally called "cancel culture"; it didn't start to be
called "wokeness" till the 2020s.
One aspect of social media that surprised almost everyone at
first was the popularity of outrage. Users seemed to 
like

being outraged. We're so used to this idea now that we take
it for granted, but really it's pretty strange. Being
outraged is not a pleasant feeling. You wouldn't expect
people to seek it out. But they do. And above all, they want
to share it. I happened to be running a forum from 2007 to
2014, so I can actually quantify how much they want to share
it: our users were about three times more likely to upvote
something if it outraged them.
This tilt toward outrage wasn't due to wokeness. It's an
inherent feature of social media, or at least this
generation of it. But it did make social media the perfect
mechanism for fanning the flames of wokeness.