[
7
]
It wasn't just public social networks that drove the rise of
wokeness though. Group chat apps were also critical,
especially in the final step, cancellation. Imagine if a
group of employees trying to get someone fired had to do it
using only email. It would be hard to organize a mob. But
once you have group chat, mobs form naturally.
Another contributing factor in this second wave of political
correctness was the dramatic increase in the polarization of
the press. In the print era, newspapers were constrained to
be, or at least seem, politically neutral. The department
stores that ran ads in the New York Times wanted to reach
everyone in the region, both liberal and conservative, so
the Times had to serve both. But the Times didn't regard
this neutrality as something forced upon them. They embraced
it as their duty as a 
paper of record
 — as one of the big
newspapers that aimed to be chronicles of their times,
reporting every sufficiently important story from a neutral
point of view.
When I grew up the papers of record seemed timeless, almost
sacred institutions. Papers like the New York Times and
Washington Post had immense prestige, partly because other
sources of news were limited, but also because they did make
some effort to be neutral.
Unfortunately it turned out that the paper of record was
mostly an artifact of the constraints imposed by print.

[
8
]

When your market was determined by geography, you had
to be neutral. But publishing online enabled — in fact
probably forced — newspapers to switch to serving markets
defined by ideology instead of geography. Most that remained
in business fell in the direction they'd already been
leaning: left. On October 11, 2020 the New York Times
announced that "The paper is in the midst of an evolution
from the stodgy paper of record into a juicy collection of
great narratives."

[
9
]

Meanwhile journalists, of a sort,
had arisen to serve the right as well. And so journalism,
which in the previous era had been one of the great
centralizing forces, now became one of the great polarizing
ones.
The rise of social media and the increasing polarization of
journalism reinforced one another. In fact there arose a new
variety of journalism involving a loop through social media.
Someone would say something controversial on social media.
Within hours it would become a news story. Outraged readers
would then post links to the story on social media, driving
further arguments online. It was the cheapest source of
clicks imaginable. You didn't have to maintain overseas news
bureaus or pay for month-long investigations. All you had to
do was watch Twitter for controversial remarks and repost
them on your site, with some additional comments to inflame
readers further.
For the press there was money in wokeness. But they weren't
the only ones. That was one of the biggest differences
between the two waves of political correctness: the first
was driven almost entirely by amateurs, but the second was
often driven by professionals. For some it was their whole
job. By 2010 a new class of administrators had arisen whose
job was basically to enforce wokeness. They played a role
similar to that of the political commissars who got attached
to military and industrial organizations in the USSR: they
weren't directly in the flow of the organization's work, but
watched from the side to ensure that nothing improper
happened in the doing of it. These new administrators could
often be recognized by the word "inclusion" in their titles.
Within institutions this was the preferred euphemism for
wokeness; a new list of banned words, for example, would
usually be called an "inclusive language guide."

[
10
]
This new class of bureaucrats pursued a woke agenda as if
their jobs depended on it, because they did. If you hire
people to keep watch for a particular type of problem,
they're going to find it, because otherwise there's no
justification for their existence.

[
11
]