established by Title IX
makes that all too clear.
[
12
]
The invention of new improprieties is most visible in
the rapid evolution of woke nomenclature. This is
particularly annoying to me as a writer, because the new
names are always worse. Any religious observance has to be
inconvenient and slightly absurd; otherwise gentiles would
do it too. So "slaves" becomes "enslaved individuals." But
web search can show us the leading edge of moral growth in
real time: if you search for "individuals experiencing
slavery" you will as of this writing find five legit
attempts to use the phrase, and you'll even find two for
"individuals experiencing enslavement."
[
13
]
Organizations that do dubious things are particularly
concerned with propriety, which is how you end up with
absurdities like tobacco and oil companies having higher ESG
ratings than Tesla.
[
14
]
Elon did something else that tilted Twitter rightward
though: he gave more visibility to paying users. Paying
users lean right on average, because people on the far left
dislike Elon and don't want to give him money. Elon
presumably knew this would happen. On the other hand, the
people on the far left have only themselves to blame; they
could tilt Twitter back to the left tomorrow if they wanted
to.
[
15
]
It even, as James Lindsay and Peter Boghossian
pointed out, has a concept of original sin: privilege. Which
means unlike Christianity's egalitarian version, people have varying
degrees of it. An able-bodied straight white
American male is born with such a load of sin that only by
the most abject repentance can he be saved.
Wokeness also shares something rather funny with many actual
versions of Christianity: like God, the people for whose
sake wokeness purports to act are often revolted by the
things done in their name.
[
16
]
There is one exception to most of these rules: actual
religious organizations. It's reasonable for them to insist
on orthodoxy. But they in turn should declare that they're
religious organizations. It's rightly considered shady
when something that appears to be an ordinary business or
publication turns out to be a religious organization.
[
17
]
I don't want to give the impression that it will be
simple to roll back wokeness. There will be places where the
fight inevitably gets messy — particularly within
universities, which everyone has to share, yet which are
currently the most pervaded by wokeness of any institutions.
[
18
]
You can however get rid of aggressively
conventional-minded people within an organization, and in
many if not most organizations this would be an excellent
idea. Even a handful of them can do a lot of damage. I bet
you'd feel a noticeable improvement going from a handful to
none.
Thanks
 to Sam Altman, 
Ben Miller, Daniel Gackle, Robin Hanson, Jessica
Livingston, Greg Lukianoff, Harj Taggar, Garry Tan, and Tim
Urban for reading drafts of this.