January 2025
The word "prig" isn't very common now, but if you look up
the definition, it will sound familiar. Google's isn't bad:

A self-righteously moralistic person who behaves as if
  superior to others.

This sense of the word originated in the 18th century, and
its age is an important clue: it shows that although
wokeness is a comparatively recent phenomenon, it's an
instance of a much older one.
There's a certain kind of person who's attracted to a
shallow, exacting kind of moral purity, and who demonstrates
his purity by attacking anyone who breaks the rules. Every
society has these people. All that changes is the rules they
enforce. In Victorian England it was Christian virtue. In
Stalin's Russia it was orthodox Marxism-Leninism. For the
woke, it's social justice.
So if you want to understand wokeness, the question to ask
is not why people behave this way. Every society has prigs.
The question to ask is why our prigs are priggish about
these ideas, at this moment. And to answer that we have to
ask when and where wokeness began.
The answer to the first question is the 1980s. Wokeness is a
second, more aggressive wave of political correctness, which
started in the late 1980s, died down in the late 1990s, and
then returned with a vengeance in the early 2010s, finally
peaking after the riots of 2020.
This was not the original meaning of "woke," but it's rarely
used in the original sense now. Now the pejorative sense is
the dominant one. What 
does
 it mean now? I've often been
asked to define both wokeness and political correctness by
people who think they're meaningless labels, so I will. They
both have the same definition:

An aggressively performative focus on social justice.

In other words, it's people being prigs about social
justice. And that's the real problem — the
performativeness, not the social justice.
Racism, for example, is a genuine problem. Not a problem on
the scale that the woke believe it to be, but a genuine one.
I don't think any reasonable person would deny that. The
problem with political correctness was not that it focused
on marginalized groups, but the shallow, aggressive way in
which it did so. Instead of going out into the world and
quietly helping members of marginalized groups, the
politically correct focused on getting people in trouble for
using the wrong words to talk about them.
As for where political correctness began, if you think about
it, you probably already know the answer. Did it begin
outside universities and spread to them from this external
source? Obviously not; it has always been most extreme in
universities. So where in universities did it begin? Did it
begin in math, or the hard sciences, or engineering, and
spread from there to the humanities and social sciences?
Those are amusing images, but no, obviously it began in the
humanities and social sciences.
Why there? And why then? What happened in the humanities and
social sciences in the 1980s?
A successful theory of the origin of political correctness
has to be able to explain why it didn't happen earlier. Why
didn't it happen during the protest movements of the 1960s,
for example? They were concerned with much the same issues.