But these
bureaucrats also represented a second and possibly even
greater danger. Many were involved in hiring, and when
possible they tried to ensure their employers hired only
people who shared their political beliefs. The most
egregious cases were the new "DEI statements" that some
universities started to require from faculty candidates,
proving their commitment to wokeness. Some universities used
these statements as the initial filter and only even
considered candidates who scored high enough on them. You're
not hiring Einstein that way; imagine what you get instead.
Another factor in the rise of wokeness was the Black Lives
Matter movement, which started in 2013 when a white man was
acquitted after killing a black teenager in Florida. But
this didn't launch wokeness; it was well underway by 2013.
Similarly for the Me Too Movement, which took off in 2017
after the first news stories about Harvey Weinstein's
history of raping women. It accelerated wokeness, but didn't
play the same role in launching it that the 80s version did
in launching political correctness.
The election of Donald Trump in 2016 also accelerated
wokeness, particularly in the press, where outrage now meant
traffic. Trump made the New York Times a lot of money:
headlines during his first administration mentioned his name
at about four times the rate of previous presidents.
In 2020 we saw the biggest accelerant of all, after a white
police officer asphyxiated a black suspect on video. At this
point the metaphorical fire became a literal one, as violent
protests broke out across America. But in retrospect this
turned out to be peak woke, or close to it. By every measure
I've seen, wokeness peaked in 2020 or 2021.
Wokeness is sometimes described as a mind-virus. What makes
it viral is that it defines new types of impropriety. Most
people are afraid of impropriety; they're never exactly sure
what the social rules are or which ones they might be
breaking. Especially if the rules change rapidly. And since
most people already worry that they might be breaking rules
they don't know about, if you tell them they're breaking a
rule, their default reaction is to believe you. Especially
if multiple people tell them. Which in turn is a recipe for
exponential growth. Zealots invent some new impropriety to
avoid. The first people to adopt it are fellow zealots,
eager for new ways to signal their virtue. If there are
enough of these, the initial group of zealots is followed by
a much larger group, motivated by fear. They're not trying
to signal virtue; they're just trying to avoid getting in
trouble. At this point the new impropriety is now firmly
established. Plus its success has increased the rate of
change in social rules, which, remember, is one of the
reasons people are nervous about which rules they might be
breaking. So the cycle accelerates.

[
12
]
What's true of individuals is even more true of
organizations. Especially organizations without a powerful
leader. Such organizations do everything based on "best
practices." There's no higher authority; if some new "best
practice" achieves critical mass, they 
must
 adopt it. And
in this case the organization can't do what it usually does
when it's uncertain: delay. It might be committing
improprieties right now! So it's surprisingly easy for a
small group of zealots to capture this type of organization
by describing new improprieties it might be guilty of.