[
3
]
The other thing you do in the face of uncertainty is to make choices
that are uncertainty-proof. The less sure you are about what to do,
the more important it is to choose options that give you more options
in the future. I call this "staying upwind." If you're unsure whether
to major in math or economics, for example, choose math; math is
upwind of economics in the sense that it will be easier to switch
later from math to economics than from economics to math.
There's one case, though, where it's easy to say whether you should
work on what interests you the most: if you want to do

great work
.
This is not a sufficient condition for doing great work, but it is
a necessary one.
There's a lot of selection bias in advice about whether to "follow
your passion," and this is the reason. Most such advice comes from
people who are famously successful, and if you ask someone who's
famously successful how to do what they did, most will tell you
that you have to work on what you're most interested in. And this
is in fact true.
That doesn't mean it's the right advice for everyone. Not everyone
can do great work, or wants to. But if you do want to, the complicated
question of whether or not to work on what interests you the most
becomes simple. The answer is yes. The root of great work is a sort
of ambitious curiosity, and you can't manufacture that.
Notes
[
1
]
These examples show why it's a mistake to assume that economic
inequality must be evidence of some kind of brokenness or unfairness.
It's obvious that different people have different interests, and
that some interests yield far more money than others, so how can
it not be obvious that some people will end up much richer than
others? In a world where some people like to write enterprise
software and others like to make studio pottery, economic inequality
is the natural outcome.
[
2
]
Difficulty choosing between interests is a different matter.
That's not always due to ignorance. It's often intrinsically
difficult. I still have trouble doing it.
[
3
]
You can't always take people at their word on this. Since
it's more prestigious to work on things you're interested in than
to be driven by money, people who are driven mainly by money will
often claim to be more interested in their work than they actually
are. One way to test such claims is by doing the following thought
experiment: if their work didn't pay well, would they take day jobs
doing something else in order to do it in their spare time? Lots
of mathematicians and scientists and engineers would. Historically
lots 
have
. But I don't think as many investment bankers would.
This thought experiment is also useful for distinguishing between
university departments.
Thanks
 to Trevor Blackwell, Paul Buchheit, 
Jessica Livingston,
Robert Morris, Harj Taggar, and Garry Tan for reading drafts of
this.