amount of money — hundreds of millions or even billions of dollars
— it turns out to be very useful to work on what interests you the
most. The reason is not the extra motivation you get from doing
this, but that the way to make a really large amount of money is
to start a startup, and working on what interests you is an excellent
way to discover 
startup ideas
.
Many if not most of the biggest startups began as projects the
founders were doing for fun. Apple, Google, and Facebook all began
that way. Why is this pattern so common? Because the best ideas
tend to be such outliers that you'd overlook them if you were
consciously looking for ways to make money. Whereas if you're young
and good at technology, your unconscious instincts about what would
be interesting to work on are very well aligned with what needs to
be built.
So there's something like a midwit peak for making money. If you
don't need to make much, you can work on whatever you're most
interested in; if you want to become moderately rich, you can't
usually afford to; but if you want to become super rich, and you're
young and good at technology, working on what you're most interested
in becomes a good idea again.
What if you're not sure what you want? What if you're attracted to
the idea of making money and more attracted to some kinds of work
than others, but neither attraction predominates? How do you break
ties?
The key here is to understand that such ties are only apparent.
When you have trouble choosing between following your interests and
making money, it's never because you have complete knowledge of
yourself and of the types of work you're choosing between, and the
options are perfectly balanced. When you can't decide which path
to take, it's almost always due to ignorance. In fact you're usually
suffering from three kinds of ignorance simultaneously: you don't
know what makes you happy, what the various kinds of work are really
like, or how well you could do them.

[
2
]
In a way this ignorance is excusable. It's often hard to predict
these things, and no one even tells you that you need to. If you're
ambitious you're told you should go to college, and this is good
advice so far as it goes, but that's where it usually ends. No one
tells you how to figure out what to work on, or how hard this can
be.
What do you do in the face of uncertainty? Get more certainty. And
probably the best way to do that is to try working on things you're
interested in. That will get you more information about how interested
you are in them, how good you are at them, and how much scope they
offer for ambition.
Don't wait. Don't wait till the end of college to figure out what
to work on. Don't even wait for internships during college. You
don't necessarily need a job doing x in order to work on x; often
you can just start doing it in some form yourself. And since figuring
out what to work on is a problem that could take years to solve,
the sooner you start, the better.
One useful trick for judging different kinds of work is to look at
who your colleagues will be. You'll become like whoever you work
with. Do you want to become like these people?
Indeed, the difference in character between different kinds of work
is magnified by the fact that everyone else is facing the same
decisions as you. If you choose a kind of work mainly for how well
it pays, you'll be surrounded by other people who chose it for the
same reason, and that will make it even more soul-sucking than it
seems from the outside. Whereas if you choose work you're genuinely
interested in, you'll be surrounded mostly by other people who are
genuinely interested in it, and that will make it extra inspiring.