2022 survey
 found that only 7% of
Harvard undergrads plan to major in the humanities, vs
nearly 30% during the 1970s. I expect wokeness is at least
part of the reason; when undergrads consider majoring in
English, it's presumably because they love the written word
and not because they want to listen to lectures about
racism.
[
3
]
The puppet-master-and-puppet character of political
correctness became clearly visible when a bakery near
Oberlin College was falsely accused of race discrimination
in 2016. In the subsequent civil trial, lawyers for the
bakery produced a text message from Oberlin Dean of Students
Meredith Raimondo that read "I'd say unleash the students if
I wasn't convinced this needs to be put behind us."
[
4
]
The woke sometimes claim that wokeness is simply
treating people with respect. But if it were, that would be
the only rule you'd have to remember, and this is comically
far from being the case. My younger son likes to imitate
voices, and at one point when he was about seven I had to
explain which accents it was currently safe to imitate
publicly and which not. It took about ten minutes, and I
still hadn't covered all the cases.
[
5
]
In 1986 the Supreme Court ruled that creating a
hostile work environment could constitute sex
discrimination, which in turn affected universities via
Title IX. The court specified that the test of a hostile
environment was whether it would bother a reasonable person,
but since for a professor merely being the subject of a
sexual harassment complaint would be a disaster whether the
complainant was reasonable or not, in practice any joke or
remark remotely connected with sex was now effectively
forbidden. Which meant we'd now come full circle to
Victorian codes of behavior, when there was a large class of
things that might not be said "with ladies present."
[
6
]
Much as they tried to pretend there was no conflict
between diversity and quality. But you can't simultaneously
optimize for two things that aren't identical. What
diversity actually means, judging from the way the term is
used, is proportional representation, and unless you're
selecting a group whose purpose is to be representative,
like poll respondents, optimizing for proportional
representation has to come at the expense of quality. This
is not because of anything about representation; it's the
nature of optimization; optimizing for x has to come at the
expense of y unless x and y are identical.
[
7
]
Maybe societies will eventually develop antibodies to
viral outrage. Maybe we were just the first to be exposed to
it, so it tore through us like an epidemic through a
previously isolated population. I'm fairly confident that it
would be possible to create new social media apps that were
less driven by outrage, and an app of this type would have a
good chance of stealing users from existing ones, because
the smartest people would tend to migrate to it.
[
8
]
I say "mostly" because I have hopes that journalistic
neutrality will return in some form. There is some market
for unbiased news, and while it may be small, it's valuable.
The rich and powerful want to know what's really going on;
that's how they became rich and powerful.
[
9
]
The Times made this momentous announcement very
informally, in passing in the middle of an

article
 about a
Times reporter who'd been criticized for inaccuracy. It's
quite possible no senior editor even approved it. But it's
somehow appropriate that this particular universe ended with
a whimper rather than a bang.
[
10
]
As the acronym DEI goes out of fashion, many of these
bureaucrats will try to go underground by changing their
titles. It looks like "belonging" will be a popular option.
[
11
]
If you've ever wondered why our legal system includes
protections like the separation of prosecutor, judge, and
jury, the right to examine evidence and cross-examine
witnesses, and the right to be represented by legal counsel,
the de facto

parallel legal system