The danger of these rules was not just that they created
land mines for the unwary, but that their elaborateness made
them an effective substitute for virtue. Whenever a society
has a concept of heresy and orthodoxy, orthodoxy becomes a
substitute for virtue. You can be the worst person in the
world, but as long as you're orthodox you're better than
everyone who isn't. This makes orthodoxy very attractive to
bad people.
But for it to work as a substitute for virtue, orthodoxy
must be difficult. If all you have to do to be orthodox is
wear some garment or avoid saying some word, everyone knows
to do it, and the only way to seem more virtuous than other
people is to actually be virtuous. The shallow, complicated,
and frequently changing rules of political correctness made
it the perfect substitute for actual virtue. And the result
was a world in which good people who weren't up to date on
current moral fashions were brought down by people whose
characters would make you recoil in horror if you could see
them.
One big contributing factor in the rise of political
correctness was the lack of other things to be morally pure
about. Previous generations of prigs had been prigs mostly
about religion and sex. But among the cultural elite these
were the deadest of dead letters by the 1980s; if you were
religious, or a virgin, this was something you tended to
conceal rather than advertise. So the sort of people who
enjoy being moral enforcers had become starved of things to
enforce. A new set of rules was just what they'd been
waiting for.
Curiously enough, the tolerant side of the 1960s left helped
create the conditions in which the intolerant side
prevailed. The relaxed social rules advocated by the old,
easy-going hippy left became the dominant ones, at least
among the elite, and this left nothing for the naturally
intolerant to be intolerant about.
Another possibly contributing factor was the fall of the
Soviet empire. Marxism had been a popular focus of moral
purity on the left before political correctness emerged as a
competitor, but the pro-democracy movements in Eastern Bloc
countries took most of the shine off it. Especially the fall
of the Berlin Wall in 1989. You couldn't be on the side of
the Stasi. I remember looking at the moribund Soviet Studies
section of a used bookshop in Cambridge in the late 1980s
and thinking "what will those people go on about now?" As it
turned out the answer was right under my nose.
One thing I noticed at the time about the first phase of
political correctness was that it was more popular with
women than men. As many writers (perhaps most eloquently
George Orwell) have observed, women seem more attracted than
men to the idea of being moral enforcers. But there was
another more specific reason women tended to be the
enforcers of political correctness. There was at this time a
great backlash against sexual harassment; the mid 1980s were
the point when the definition of sexual harassment was
expanded from explicit sexual advances to creating a
"hostile environment." Within universities the classic form
of accusation was for a (female) student to say that a
professor made her "feel uncomfortable." But the vagueness
of this accusation allowed the radius of forbidden behavior
to expand to include talking about heterodox ideas. Those
make people uncomfortable too.