[
13
]
How does this kind of cycle ever end? Eventually it leads to
disaster, and people start to say enough is enough. The
excesses of 2020 made a lot of people say that.
Since then wokeness has been in gradual but continual
retreat. Corporate CEOs, starting with Brian Armstrong, have
openly rejected it. Universities, led by the University of
Chicago and MIT, have explicitly confirmed their commitment
to free speech. Twitter, which was arguably the hub of
wokeness, was bought by Elon Musk in order to neutralize it,
and he seems to have succeeded — and not, incidentally, by
censoring left-wing users the way Twitter used to censor
right-wing ones, but without censoring either.

[
14
]

Consumers have emphatically rejected brands that ventured
too far into wokeness. The Bud Light brand may have been
permanently damaged by it. I'm not going to claim Trump's
second victory in 2024 was a referendum on wokeness; I think
he won, as presidential candidates always do, because he was
more 
charismatic
; but voters' 
disgust with wokeness must have helped.
So what do we do now? Wokeness is already in retreat.
Obviously we should help it along. What's the best way to do
that? And more importantly, how do we avoid a third
outbreak? After all, it seemed to be dead once, but came
back worse than ever.
In fact there's an even more ambitious goal: is there a way
to prevent any similar outbreak of aggressively performative
moralism in the future — not just a third outbreak of
political correctness, but the next thing like it? Because
there will be a next thing. Prigs are prigs by nature. They
need rules to obey and enforce, and now that Darwin has cut
off their traditional supply of rules, they're constantly
hungry for new ones. All they need is someone to meet them
halfway by defining a new way to be morally pure, and we'll
see the same phenomenon again.
Let's start with the easier problem. Is there a simple,
principled way to deal with wokeness? I think there is: to
use the customs we already have for dealing with religion.
Wokeness is effectively a religion, just with God replaced
by protected classes. It's not even the first religion of
this kind; Marxism had a similar form, with God replaced by
the masses.

[
15
]

And we already have well-established
customs for dealing with religion within organizations. You
can express your own religious identity and explain your
beliefs, but you can't call your coworkers infidels if they
disagree, or try to ban them from saying things that
contradict its doctrines, or insist that the organization
adopt yours as its official religion.
If we're not sure what to do about any particular
manifestation of wokeness, imagine we were dealing with some
other religion, like Christianity. Should we have people
within organizations whose jobs are to enforce woke
orthodoxy? No, because we wouldn't have people whose jobs
were to enforce Christian orthodoxy. Should we censor

writers
 or

scientists
 whose work contradicts woke doctrines?
No, because we wouldn't do this to people whose work
contradicted Christian teachings. Should job candidates be
required to write DEI statements? Of course not; imagine an
employer requiring proof of one's religious beliefs. Should
students and employees have to participate in woke
indoctrination sessions in which they're required to answer
questions about their beliefs to ensure compliance? No,
because we wouldn't dream of catechizing people in this way
about their religion.